CHAPTER  I 
THE SCIENCE OF PSY CHOLOGY 
Man y pe ople belie ve tha t women tend to talk mor e than men— with some e ven sugg esting tha t this 
difference has a biolog ical basis. One widel y cited estima te is tha t women spe ak 20 ,000 w ords per da y on 
average and men spe ak onl y 7,000. This claim se ems pla usible, but is i t true? A gr oup o f psy cholog ists le d 
by Ma tthias M ehl de cided to =nd out. The y che cked to se e if an yone had ac tuall y trie d to c ount the dail y 
number o f words spok en b y women and men. N o one had. So these r esearchers c onduc ted a stud y in which 
female and male c olleg e studen ts (369 in all) w ore audio r ecorders while the y went about their liv es. The 
result? The w omen spok e an a verage of 16,215 w ords per da y and the men spok e an a verage of 15,669—an 
extremel y small dif ference tha t could e asily be e xplaine d by chanc e. In an ar ticle in the journal Science , these 
researchers summe d up their =ndings as f ollows: “ We ther efore conclude, on the basis o f available empiric al 
evidenc e, tha t the widespr ead and hig hly publiciz ed ster eotype about f emale talka tiveness is unf ounde d” 
(Mehl, V azire, Ramir ez-Esparza, Sla tcher , & P ennebak er, 200 7, p. 82)1. 
Psycholog y is usuall y de=ne d as the scien ti=c stud y of human beha vior and men tal pr ocesses, and this 
example illustr ates the f eatures tha t mak e it scien ti=c. I n this chapter , we look closel y at these f eatures, 
review the g oals o f psy cholog y, and addr ess se veral basic questions tha t studen ts often ha ve about i t. Who 
conduc ts scien ti=c r esearch in psy cholog y? W hy? Does scien ti=c psy cholog y tell us an ything tha t common 
sense does not? W hy should I bother to le arn the scien ti=c appr oach—espe cially if I w ant to be a clinic al 
psycholog ist and not a r esearcher? These ar e extremel y good questions, and answ ering them no w will 
provide a solid f ounda tion f or le arning the r est o f the ma terial in y our c ourse. 
Notes 
1. Mehl, M. R., V azire, S., Ramir ez-Esparza, N ., Sla tcher , R. B., & P ennebak er, J. W. (200 7). Ar e women r eally mor e talka tive 
than men ? Science , 317, 82. 
The Scienc e of Psycholog y  |  11.  Methods of K nowing 
Learnin g Objectives 
1. Descri be the 5 me thods o f acquiring kno wledge 
2. Understand  the bene= ts and pr oblems wi th each. 
 
Take a minute to ponder some o f wha t you kno w and ho w you ac quired tha t kno wledge. Perhaps y ou kno w 
that you should mak e your be d in the morning be cause y our mother or fa ther told y ou this is wha t you 
should do, per haps y ou kno w tha t sw ans ar e whi te be cause all o f the sw ans y ou ha ve seen ar e whi te, or 
perhaps y ou kno w tha t your friend is l ying to y ou be cause she is ac ting str ange and w on’t look y ou in the 
eye. But should w e trust kno wledge from these sour ces? The me thods o f acquiring kno wledge can be br oken 
down in to =v e categories e ach wi th its own str engths and w eaknesses. 
Intuition 
The =rst me thod o f kno wing is in tuition. W hen w e use our in tuition, w e are relying on our guts, our 
emotions, and /or our instinc ts to guide us. Ra ther than e xamining fac ts or using r ational thoug ht, intuition 
involves belie ving wha t feels true. The pr oblem wi th relying on in tuition is tha t our in tuitions c an be wr ong 
because the y are driv en b y cogni tive and motiv ational biases r ather than log ical reasoning or scien ti=c 
evidenc e. W hile the str ange beha vior o f your friend ma y lead you to think s /he is l ying to y ou it ma y just be 
that s/he is holding in a bi t of gas or is pr eoccupie d with some other issue tha t is irr elevant to y ou. H owever, 
weighing alterna tives and thinking o f all the dif ferent possi bilities c an be par alyzing f or some pe ople and 
some times de cisions base d on in tuition ar e actuall y superior to those base d on anal ysis (pe ople in terested 
in this ide a should r ead Malc olm Glad well’s book B link)1. 
Authority 
Perhaps one o f the most c ommon me thods o f acquiring kno wledge is thr ough authori ty. This me thod 
involves ac cepting ne w ide as be cause some a uthori ty =gur e sta tes tha t the y are true. These a uthori ties 
include par ents, the me dia, doc tors, Priests and other r eligious a uthori ties, the g overnmen t, and pr ofessors. 
While in an ide al w orld w e should be able to trust a uthori ty =gur es, histor y has ta ught us other wise 
and man y instanc es of atrocities against humani ty are a c onse quenc e of people unquestioning ly following 
Methods o f Kno wing   |  3authori ty (e.g., Salem W itch T rials, N azi W ar Crimes ). On a mor e benign le vel, while y our par ents ma y 
have told y ou tha t you should mak e your be d in the morning, making y our be d pr ovides the w arm damp 
environmen t in which mi tes thriv e. Keeping the she ets open pr ovides a less hospi table en vironmen t for 
mites. These e xamples illustr ate tha t the pr oblem wi th using a uthori ty to obtain kno wledge is tha t the y ma y 
be wr ong, the y ma y just be using their in tuition to arriv e at their c onclusions, and the y ma y have their o wn 
reasons to misle ad y ou. N evertheless, much o f the inf orma tion w e ac quire is thr ough authori ty be cause 
we don ’t ha ve time to question and independen tly research e very pie ce of kno wledge we learn thr ough 
authori ty. But w e can le arn to e valuate the cr edentials o f authori ty =gur es, to e valuate the me thods the y 
used to arriv e at their c onclusions, and e valuate whe ther the y have any reasons to misle ad us. 
Rationalism 
Rationalism in volves using log ic and r easoning to ac quire ne w kno wledge. Using this me thod pr emises ar e 
stated and log ical rules ar e followed to arriv e at sound c onclusions. F or instanc e, if I am g iven the pr emise 
that all sw ans ar e whi te and the pr emise tha t this is a sw an then I c an come to the r ational c onclusion tha t 
this sw an is whi te wi thout ac tuall y seeing the sw an. The pr oblem wi th this me thod is tha t if the pr emises 
are wr ong or ther e is an err or in log ic then the c onclusion will not be v alid. F or instanc e, the pr emise tha t 
all sw ans ar e whi te is inc orrect; ther e are black sw ans in Austr alia. Also, unless f ormall y trained in the rules 
of log ic it is e asy to mak e an err or. Nevertheless, if the pr emises ar e correct and log ical rules ar e followed 
appr opria tely then this is sound me ans o f acquiring kno wledge. 
Empiricism 
Empiricism in volves ac quiring kno wledge thr ough obser vation and e xperienc e. Onc e again man y of you 
may ha ve belie ved tha t all sw ans ar e whi te be cause y ou ha ve onl y ever se en white sw ans. F or centuries 
people belie ved the w orld is >a t be cause i t appe ars to be >a t. These e xamples and the man y visual 
illusions tha t trick our senses illustr ate the pr oblems wi th relying on empiricism alone to deriv e kno wledge. 
We are limi ted in wha t we can e xperienc e and obser ve and our senses c an de ceive us. M oreover, our 
prior e xperienc es can alter the w ay we per ceive events. N evertheless, empiricism is a t the he art of the 
scien ti=c me thod. Scienc e relies on obser vations. B ut not just an y obser vations, scienc e relies on struc tured 
obser vations which is kno wn as systema tic empiricism. 
The Scientific Method 
The scien ti4c method  is a pr ocess o f systema tically collecting and e valuating e videnc e to test ide as and 
answ er questions. W hile scien tists ma y use in tuition, a uthori ty, rationalism, and empiricism to g ener ate 
new ide as the y don ’t stop ther e. Scien tists g o a step fur ther b y using systema tic empiricism to mak e careful 
4  |  Methods o f Kno wingobser vations under v arious c ontrolled condi tions in or der to test their ide as and the y use r ationalism to 
arriv e at valid c onclusions. W hile the scien ti=c me thod is the most lik ely of all o f the me thods to pr oduc e 
valid kno wledge, lik e all me thods o f acquiring kno wledge it also has i ts dr awbacks. One major pr oblem is 
that it is not al ways feasible to use the scien ti=c me thod; this me thod c an require consider able time and 
resour ces. Another pr oblem wi th the scien ti=c me thod is tha t it cannot be use d to answ er all questions. As 
descri bed in the f ollowing se ction, the scien ti=c me thod c an onl y be use d to addr ess empiric al questions. 
This book and y our r esearch me thods c ourse ar e designe d to pr ovide y ou wi th an in-depth e xamina tion o f 
how psy cholog ists use the scien ti=c me thod to ad vance our understanding o f human beha vior and the mind. 
 
Notes 
1. Glad well, M. E. (2005). Blink: The power of thinking without thinking.  (9th e d.). N ew York: Little, B rown & Co. 
Methods o f Kno wing   |  52.  Understanding Scienc e 
Learnin g Objectives 
1. De=ne scienc e. 
2. Descri be the thr ee fundamen tal features of scienc e. 
3. Explain wh y psy cholog y is a scienc e. 
4. De=ne pseudoscienc e and g ive some e xamples. 
What Is Scienc e? 
Some pe ople ar e surprise d to le arn tha t psy cholog y is a  science . The y gener ally agr ee tha t astr onom y, 
biolog y, and chemistr y are scienc es but w onder wha t psy cholog y has in c ommon wi th these other =elds. 
Before answ ering this question, ho wever, it is w orth re>ecting on wha t astr onom y, biolog y, and chemistr y 
have in c ommon wi th each other . It is cle arly not their subje ct ma tter. Astr onomers stud y celestial bodies, 
biolog ists stud y living or ganisms, and chemists stud y ma tter and i ts pr oper ties. I t is also not the e quipmen t 
and te chniques tha t the y use. F ew biolog ists w ould kno w wha t to do wi th a r adio telesc ope, f or example, 
and f ew chemists w ould kno w ho w to tr ack a moose popula tion in the wild. F or these and other r easons, 
philosophers and scien tists who ha ve thoug ht deeply about this question ha ve conclude d tha t wha t the 
scienc es ha ve in c ommon is a g ener al appr oach to understanding the na tural world. P sycholog y is a scienc e 
because i t tak es this same g ener al appr oach to understanding one aspe ct of the na tural w orld: human 
beha vior. 
Features of Scienc e 
The g ener al scien ti=c appr oach has thr ee fundamen tal f eatures ( Stano vich, 2010 )1. The =rst 
is systema tic empiricism . Empiricism r efers to le arning base d on obser vation, and scien tists le arn about 
the na tural w orld systema tically, by carefull y planning, making, r ecording, and anal yzing obser vations o f 
it. As w e will se e, log ical reasoning and e ven cr eativity pla y impor tant roles in scienc e too, but scien tists 
are unique in their insistenc e on che cking their ide as about the w ay the w orld is against their systema tic 
obser vations. N otice, for example, tha t Mehl and his c olleagues did not trust other pe ople ’s ster eotypes 
or e ven their o wn inf ormal obser vations. I nste ad, the y systema tically recorded, counted, and c ompar ed 
the number o f words spok en b y a lar ge sample o f women and men. F urthermor e, when their systema tic 
obser vations turne d out to c on>ic t with pe ople ’s ster eotypes, the y truste d their systema tic obser vations. 
6  |  Understanding Scienc eThe se cond f eature of the scien ti=c appr oach— which f ollows in a str aightforward way from the =rst—is 
that it is c oncerne d wi th empirical  questions . These ar e questions about the w ay the w orld ac tuall y is and, 
therefore, can be answ ered by systema tically obser ving i t. The question o f whe ther w omen talk mor e than 
men is empiric al in this w ay. Either w omen r eally do talk mor e than men or the y do not, and this c an be 
determine d by systema tically obser ving ho w much w omen and men ac tuall y talk. H aving said this, ther e 
are man y interesting and impor tant questions tha t are not empiric ally testable and tha t scienc e is not in 
a posi tion to answ er. Among these ar e questions about v alues— whether things ar e good or bad, just or 
unjust, or be autiful or ug ly, and ho w the w orld ought  to be. So althoug h the question o f whe ther a ster eotype 
is ac curate or inac curate is an empiric ally testable one tha t scienc e can answ er, the question—or , rather, 
the v alue judgmen t—of whe ther i t is wr ong f or pe ople to hold inac curate ster eotypes is not. S imilar ly, the 
question o f whe ther criminal beha vior has a g enetic basis is an empiric al question, but the question o f wha t 
actions oug ht to be c onsider ed illegal is not. I t is espe cially impor tant for researchers in psy cholog y to be 
mindful o f this distinc tion. 
The thir d feature of scienc e is tha t it creates public kno wledg e. After asking their empiric al questions, 
making their systema tic obser vations, and dr awing their c onclusions, scien tists publish their w ork. This 
usuall y me ans wri ting an ar ticle f or public ation in a pr ofessional journal, in which the y put their r esearch 
question in the c ontext of previous r esearch, descri be in de tail the me thods the y use d to answ er their 
question, and cle arly presen t their r esults and c onclusions. I ncreasing ly, scien tists ar e opting to publish 
their w ork in open ac cess journals, in which the ar ticles ar e freely available to all – scien tists and 
nonscien tists alik e. This impor tant choic e allo ws publicl y-funde d research to cr eate kno wledge tha t is trul y 
public. 
Public ation is an essen tial f eature of scienc e for two reasons. One is tha t scienc e is a social pr ocess—a lar ge-
scale c ollabor ation among man y researchers distri bute d acr oss both time and spac e. Our curr ent scien ti=c 
knowledge of most topics is base d on man y dif ferent studies c onduc ted by man y dif ferent researchers who 
have shar ed their w ork publicl y over man y years. The se cond is tha t public ation allo ws scienc e to be self -
correcting. I ndividual scien tists understand tha t, despi te their best ef forts, their me thods c an be >a wed 
and their c onclusions inc orrect. Public ation allo ws others in the scien ti=c c ommuni ty to de tect and c orrect 
these err ors so tha t, over time, scien ti=c kno wledge incr easing ly re>ects the w ay the w orld ac tuall y is. 
A good e xample o f the self -correcting na ture of scienc e is the “ Man y Labs R eplic ation Pr oject” – a lar ge 
and c oordina ted effort by pr ominen t psy cholog ical scien tists ar ound the w orld to a ttempt to r eplic ate 
=ndings fr om 13 classic and c ontempor ary studies (Klein e t al., 2013 )2. One o f the =ndings sele cted by these 
researchers f or replic ation w as the fascina ting ef fect, =rst r epor ted by Simone Schnall and her c olleagues 
at the Univ ersity of Plymouth, tha t washing one ’s hands le ads pe ople to vie w mor al transgr essions—r anging 
from k eeping mone y inside a f ound w allet to using a ki tten f or se xual ar ousal—as less wr ong ( Schnall, 
Benton, & H arvey, 2008 )3. If reliable, this ef fect mig ht help e xplain wh y so man y religious tr aditions associa te 
physical cle anliness wi th mor al puri ty. However, despi te using the same ma terials and ne arly iden tical 
procedures wi th a much lar ger sample, the “Man y Labs” r esearchers w ere unable to r eplic ate the orig inal 
=nding (J ohnson, Cheung, & Donnellan, 2013 )4, sugg esting tha t the orig inal =nding ma y have stemme d from 
the r elatively small sample siz e (which c an le ad to unr eliable r esults ) use d in the orig inal stud y. To be cle ar, 
at this stag e we are still unable to de=ni tively conclude tha t the hand washing ef fect does not e xist; ho wever, 
Understanding Scienc e  |  7the ef fort tha t has g one in to testing i ts reliabili ty certainl y demonstr ates the c ollabor ative and c autious 
nature of scien ti=c pr ogress. 
For mor e on the r eplic ation crisis in psy cholog y see: http://nobapr oject.com/modules /the-r eplic ation-
crisis-in-psy cholog y 
Scienc e Versus Pseudoscienc e 
Pseudoscience  refers to ac tivities and beliefs tha t are claime d to be scien ti=c b y their pr oponen ts—and 
may appe ar to be scien ti=c a t =rst g lance—but ar e not. Consider the the ory of bior hythms ( not to be 
confuse d wi th sle ep c ycles or cir cadian r hythms  that do ha ve a scien ti=c basis ). The ide a is tha t people ’s 
physical, in telle ctual, and emotional abili ties run in c ycles tha t beg in when the y are born and c ontinue un til 
they die. Alleg edly, the ph ysical cycle has a period o f 23 da ys, the in telle ctual c ycle a period o f 33 da ys, 
and the emotional c ycle a period o f 28 da ys. So, f or example, if y ou had the option o f when to sche dule 
an exam, y ou w ould w ant to sche dule i t for a time when y our in telle ctual c ycle will be a t a hig h poin t. The 
theory of bior hythms has be en ar ound f or mor e than 100 y ears, and y ou c an =nd numer ous popular books 
and w ebsites about bior hythms, o ften c ontaining impr essiv e and scien ti=c-sounding terms lik e sinusoidal 
wave  and bioelectricity . The pr oblem wi th bior hythms, ho wever, is tha t scien ti=c e videnc e indic ates the y do 
not exist (H ines, 1998 )5. 
A se t of beliefs or ac tivities c an be said to be pseudoscien ti=c if ( a) its adher ents claim or impl y tha t it is 
scien ti=c but (b ) it lacks one or mor e of the thr ee features of scienc e. For instanc e, it mig ht lack systema tic 
empiricism. Ei ther ther e is no r elevant scien ti=c r esearch or , as in the c ase o f bior hythms, ther e is r elevant 
scien ti=c r esearch but i t is ignor ed. It mig ht also lack public kno wledge. People who pr omote the beliefs or 
activities mig ht claim to ha ve conduc ted scien ti=c r esearch but ne ver publish tha t research in a w ay tha t 
allows others to e valuate it. 
A set of beliefs and ac tivities mig ht also be pseudoscien ti=c be cause i t does not addr ess empiric al questions. 
The philosopher Kar l Popper w as espe cially concerne d wi th this ide a (Popper , 200 2)6. He argued mor e 
speci=cally tha t any scien ti=c claim must be e xpresse d in such a w ay tha t ther e are obser vations tha t 
would—if the y were made—c ount as e videnc e against the claim. I n other w ords, scien ti=c claims must 
be falsi4ab le. The claim tha t women talk mor e than men is falsi=able be cause systema tic obser vations c ould 
reveal either tha t the y do talk mor e than men or tha t the y do not. As an e xample o f an unfalsi=able claim, 
consider tha t man y pe ople who belie ve in e xtrasensor y per ception (ESP ) and other psy chic po wers claim 
that such po wers c an disappe ar when the y are obser ved too closel y. This mak es it so tha t no possi ble 
obser vation w ould c ount as e videnc e against ESP . If a careful test o f a self -proclaime d psy chic sho wed tha t 
she pr edicted the futur e at better-than-chanc e levels, this w ould be c onsisten t with the claim tha t she 
had psy chic po wers. B ut if she faile d to pr edict the futur e at better-than-chanc e levels, this w ould also be 
consisten t with the claim be cause her po wers c an suppose dly disappe ar when the y are obser ved too closel y. 
Why should w e concern oursel ves wi th pseudoscienc e? Ther e are at least thr ee reasons. One is tha t learning 
about pseudoscienc e helps bring the fundamen tal features of scienc e—and their impor tanc e—in to sharper 
focus. A se cond is tha t bior hythms, psy chic po wers, astr olog y, and man y other pseudoscien ti=c beliefs 
8  |  Understanding Scienc eare widel y held and ar e pr omote d on the I nterne t, on tele vision, and in books and magazines. F ar fr om 
being harmless, the pr omotion o f these beliefs o ften r esults in gr eat personal toll as, f or example, belie vers 
in pseudoscienc e opt f or “tr eatmen ts” such as home opathy for serious me dical condi tions inste ad o f 
empiric ally-suppor ted treatmen ts. Le arning wha t mak es them pseudoscien ti=c c an help us to iden tify and 
evaluate such beliefs and pr actices when w e enc ounter them. A thir d reason is tha t man y pseudoscienc es 
purpor t to e xplain some aspe ct of human beha vior and men tal pr ocesses, including bior hythms, astr olog y, 
grapholog y (hand writing anal ysis), and magne t ther apy for pain c ontrol. It is impor tant for studen ts of 
psycholog y to distinguish their o wn =eld cle arly from this “ pseudo psy cholog y.” 
 
The Skeptic’ s Dictionary 
An e xcellen t sour ce for inf orma tion on pseudoscienc e is The Sk eptic ’s Dictionar y (http://www.skepdic.c om). 
Among the pseudoscien ti=c beliefs and pr actices you c an le arn about ar e the f ollowing: 
• Cryptozoo logy. The stud y of “hidden ” creatures lik e Bigfoot, the Loch N ess monster , and the chupac abra. 
• Pseudoscien ti4c psy chother apies.  Past-lif e regression, r ebirthing ther apy, and bioscr eam ther apy, 
among others. 
• Homeopa thy. The tr eatmen t of me dical condi tions using na tural substanc es tha t have been dilute d 
some times to the poin t of no long er being pr esen t. 
• Pyramido logy. Odd the ories about the orig in and func tion o f the E gyptian p yramids ( e.g., tha t the y were 
built b y extraterrestrials ) and the ide a tha t pyramids, in g ener al, ha ve healing and other spe cial po wers. 
Another e xcellen t online r esour ce is Neurobonk ers (http://neur obonk ers.c om), which r egular ly posts ar ticles 
that investiga te claims tha t per tain spe ci=cally to psy cholog ical scienc e. 
Notes 
1. Stano vich, K. E. (2010 ). How to think str aight about psychology  (9th e d.). Boston, MA: All yn & Bac on. 
2. Klein, R. A., Ra tliff, K. A., V ianello, M., Adams, R. B., Bahník, S., Bernstein, M. J ., . . . N osek, B. A. (2013 ). Investiga ting 
variation in r eplic ability: A “ man y labs” r eplic ation pr oject. Social Psychology, 45 (3), 142 -152. doi: 10 .1027/1864-9335 /
a000178 
3. Schnall, S., Ben ton, J ., & H arvey, S. (2008 ). With a cle an conscienc e: Cle anliness r educes the se verity of mor al 
judgmen ts. Psychological Science, 19 (12), 1219- 1222. doi: 10 .1111/j.146 7-9280 .2008. 02227 .x 
4. Johnson, D . J., Cheung, F ., & Donnellan, M. B. (2013 ). Does cle anliness in>uenc e mor al judgmen ts? A dir ect replic ation 
of Schnall, Ben ton, and H arvey (2008 ). Social Psychology, 45 (3), 209- 215. doi: 10 .1027/1864-9335 /a000186 
5. Hines, T . M. (1998 ). Compr ehensiv e review of bior hythm the ory. Psychological R eports, 83 , 19–64. 
6. Popper , K. R. (200 2). Conjectur es and r efutations: The gr owth of scienti5c knowledge . New York, NY : Routle dge. 
Understanding Scienc e  |  93.  Goals of Scienc e 
Learnin g Objectives 
1. Descri be the thr ee goals o f scienc e and g ive an e xample f or each. 
2. Distinguish be tween basic r esearch and applie d research. 
The Br oader P urposes of Scientific R esearch in Psycholog y 
People ha ve always be en curious about the na tural world, including themsel ves and their beha vior ( in fac t, 
this is pr obabl y wh y you ar e stud ying psy cholog y in the =rst plac e). Scienc e grew out o f this na tural curiosi ty 
and has be come the best w ay to achie ve de taile d and ac curate kno wledge. Keep in mind tha t most o f the 
phenomena and the ories tha t =ll psy cholog y textbooks ar e the pr oduc ts of scien ti=c r esearch. I n a t ypical 
introduc tory psy cholog y textbook, f or example, one c an le arn about spe ci=c c ortical ar eas for languag e and 
perception, principles o f classic al and oper ant condi tioning, biases in r easoning and judgmen t, and pe ople ’s 
surprising tendenc y to obe y those in posi tions o f authori ty. And scien ti=c r esearch continues be cause wha t 
we kno w rig ht now onl y scr atches the surfac e of wha t we can know. 
The Thr ee Goals of Scienc e 
The =rst and most basic g oal o f scienc e is to descri be. This g oal is achie ved by making c areful obser vations. 
As an e xample, per haps I am in terested in be tter understanding the me dical condi tions tha t me dical 
marijuana pa tients use marijuana to tr eat. In this c ase, I c ould tr y to ac cess r ecords at several lar ge me dical 
marijuana lic ensing c enters to se e which c ondi tions pe ople ar e getting lic ense d to use me dical marijuana. Or 
I could sur vey a lar ge sample o f me dical marijuana pa tients and ask them to r epor t which me dical condi tions 
they use marijuana to tr eat or manag e. Indeed, research in volving sur veys of me dical marijuana pa tients has 
been conduc ted and has f ound tha t the primar y symptom me dical marijuana pa tients use marijuana to tr eat 
is pain, f ollowed by anxie ty and depr ession ( Sexton, Cut tler, Finnell, & Mischle y, 2016 ).1. 
The se cond g oal o f scienc e is to pr edict . Onc e we have obser ved wi th some r egulari ty tha t two beha viors 
or e vents ar e systema tically related to one another w e can use tha t inf orma tion to pr edict whe ther an 
event or beha vior will oc cur in a c ertain si tuation. Onc e I kno w tha t most me dical marijuana pa tients use 
marijuana to tr eat pain I c an use tha t informa tion to pr edict tha t an individual who uses me dical marijuana 
likely experienc es pain. Of c ourse, m y predictions will not be 100% ac curate but if the r elationship be tween 
medical marijuana use and pain is str ong then m y predictions will ha ve greater than chanc e accuracy. 
10  |  Goals o f Scienc eThe thir d and ultima te goal o f scienc e is to exp lain. This g oal in volves de termining the c auses o f beha vior. 
For example, r esearchers mig ht try to understand the me chanisms thr ough which marijuana r educes pain. 
Does marijuana r educe in>amma tion which in turn r educes pain ? Or does marijuana simpl y reduce the 
distr ess associa ted wi th pain r ather than r educing pain i tself ? As y ou c an se e these questions tap a t the 
under lying me chanisms and c ausal r elationships. 
Basic versus Applie d Research 
Scien ti=c r esearch is o ften classi=e d as being ei ther basic or applie d. Basic  resear ch in psy cholog y is 
conduc ted primaril y for the sak e of achie ving a mor e de taile d and ac curate understanding o f human 
beha vior, without ne cessaril y trying to addr ess an y par ticular pr actical pr oblem. The r esearch o f Mehl and 
his c olleagues falls in to this c ategory. Applied resear ch is conduc ted primaril y to addr ess some pr actical 
problem. R esearch on the ef fects of cell phone use on driving, f or example, w as pr ompte d by saf ety concerns 
and has le d to the enac tmen t of laws to limi t this pr actice. Althoug h the distinc tion be tween basic and 
applie d research is c onvenien t, it is not al ways cle ar-cut. F or example, basic r esearch on se x dif ferences in 
talka tiveness c ould e ventuall y ha ve an ef fect on ho w marriag e ther apy is pr acticed, and applie d research 
on the ef fect of cell phone use on driving c ould pr oduc e ne w insig hts in to basic pr ocesses o f per ception, 
attention, and ac tion. 
Notes 
1. Sexton, M., Cut tler, C., F innell, J ., & Mischle y, L (2016 ). A cr oss-se ctional sur vey of me dical cannabis users: P atterns o f 
use and per ceived ef=cacy. Cannabis and Cannabinoid R esear ch, 1,  131-138. doi: 10 .1089/can.2016. 0007. 
Goals o f Scienc e  |  114.  Scienc e and Common Sense 
Learnin g Objectives 
1. Explain the limi tations o f common sense when i t comes to achie ving a de taile d and ac curate 
understanding o f human beha vior. 
2. Give several examples o f common sense or f olk psy cholog y tha t are inc orrect. 
3. De=ne sk epticism and i ts role in scien ti=c psy cholog y. 
Can W e Rely on Common Sense? 
Some pe ople w onder whe ther the scien ti=c appr oach to psy cholog y is ne cessar y. Can w e not r each the 
same c onclusions base d on c ommon sense or in tuition? Cer tainl y we all ha ve intuitive beliefs about pe ople ’s 
beha vior, thoug hts, and f eelings—and these beliefs ar e collectively referred to as folk psychology. Althoug h 
much o f our f olk psy cholog y is pr obabl y reasonabl y accurate, it is cle ar tha t much o f it is not. F or example, 
most pe ople belie ve tha t ang er c an be r elieved by “le tting i t out”—per haps b y punching some thing or 
screaming loudl y. Scien ti=c r esearch, ho wever, has sho wn tha t this appr oach tends to le ave pe ople f eeling 
more angr y, not less (B ushman, 200 2)1. Likewise, most pe ople belie ve tha t no one w ould c onfess to a crime 
that the y  had not c ommi tted unless per haps tha t person w as being ph ysically tor tured. But again, e xtensiv e 
empiric al research has sho wn tha t false c onfessions ar e surprising ly common and oc cur f or a v ariety of 
reasons (Kassin & Gudjonsson, 2004 )2. 
 
Some Great Myths 
In 50 Gr eat M yths of P opular Psychology , psy cholog ist Sc ott Lilienf eld and c olleagues discuss se veral widel y 
held c ommonsense beliefs about human beha vior tha t scien ti=c r esearch has sho wn to be inc orrect (Lilienf eld, 
Lynn, Ruscio, & Be yerstein, 2010 )3. Here is a shor t list: 
• “People use onl y 10% o f their br ain po wer.” 
• “Most pe ople e xperienc e a midlif e crisis in their 40’ s or 50’ s.” 
• “Studen ts learn best when te aching st yles ar e ma tche d to their le arning st yles.” 
• “Low self -este em is a major c ause o f psy cholog ical pr oblems. ” 
12  |  Scienc e and Common Sense• “Psychiatric admissions and crimes incr ease during full moons. ” 
How Could W e Be So W rong? 
How can so man y of our in tuitive beliefs about human beha vior be so wr ong? Notice tha t this is an empiric al 
question, and i t just so happens tha t psy cholog ists ha ve conduc ted scien ti=c r esearch on i t and iden ti=ed 
man y contributing fac tors ( Gilovich, 1991)4. One is tha t forming de taile d and ac curate beliefs r equires 
powers o f obser vation, memor y, and anal ysis to an e xten t tha t we do not na turally possess. I t would be 
nearly impossi ble to c ount the number o f words spok en b y the w omen and men w e happen to enc ounter, 
estima te the number o f words the y spok e per da y, average these numbers f or both gr oups, and c ompar e 
them—all in our he ads. This is wh y we tend to r ely on men tal shor tcuts ( what psy cholog ists r efer to as 
heuristics ) in f orming and main taining our beliefs. F or example, if a belief is widel y shar ed—espe cially if i t 
is endorse d by “exper ts”—and i t mak es in tuitive sense, w e tend to assume i t is true. This is c ompounde d 
by the fac t tha t we then tend to f ocus on c ases tha t con=rm our in tuitive beliefs and not on c ases tha t 
dis-c on=rm them. This is c alled con4rma tion bias. For example, onc e we beg in to belie ve tha t women ar e 
more talka tive than men, w e tend to notic e and r emember talka tive women and silen t men but ignor e or 
forget silen t women and talka tive men. W e also hold inc orrect beliefs in par t because i t would be nic e if 
they were true. F or example, man y pe ople belie ve tha t calorie-r educing die ts ar e an ef fective long-term 
treatmen t for obesi ty, yet a thor ough review of the scien ti=c e videnc e has sho wn tha t the y are not (Mann e t 
al., 200 7)5. People ma y continue to belie ve in the ef fectiveness o f die ting in par t because i t gives them hope 
for losing w eight if the y are obese or mak es them f eel good about their o wn “ self-control” if the y are not. 
Scien tists—espe cially psy cholog ists—understand tha t the y are just as susc eptible as an yone else to in tuitive 
but inc orrect beliefs. This is wh y the y cultiv ate an a ttitude o f skepticism . Being sk eptic al does not me an 
being c ynical or distrustful, nor does i t me an questioning e very belief or claim one c omes acr oss ( which 
would be impossi ble an yway). Inste ad, i t me ans pa using to c onsider alterna tives and to se arch f or 
evidenc e—espe cially systema tically collected empiric al evidenc e—when ther e is enoug h at stak e to justif y 
doing so. F or example, imag ine tha t you read a magazine ar ticle tha t claims tha t giving childr en a w eekly 
allowance is a g ood w ay to help them de velop =nancial r esponsi bility. This is an in teresting and poten tially 
impor tant claim ( espe cially if y ou ha ve childr en o f your o wn). Taking an a ttitude o f skepticism, ho wever, 
would me an pa using to ask whe ther i t mig ht be inste ad tha t receiving an allo wance mer ely teaches childr en 
to spend mone y—per haps e ven to be mor e ma terialistic. T aking an a ttitude o f skepticism w ould also me an 
asking wha t evidenc e suppor ts the orig inal claim. I s the a uthor a scien ti=c r esearcher? I s an y scien ti=c 
evidenc e cited? If the issue w as impor tant enoug h, it mig ht also me an turning to the r esearch li terature to 
see if an yone else had studie d it. 
Because ther e is o ften not enoug h evidenc e to full y evaluate a belief or claim, scien tists also cultiv ate a 
tolerance  for uncertain ty. The y ac cept tha t ther e are man y things tha t the y simpl y do not kno w. For 
example, i t turns out tha t ther e is no scien ti=c e videnc e tha t receiving an allo wance causes childr en to be 
Scienc e and Common Sense   |  13more =nanciall y responsi ble, nor is ther e an y scien ti=c e videnc e tha t it causes them to be ma terialistic. 
Althoug h this kind o f unc ertainty can be pr oblema tic fr om a pr actical perspe ctive—for example, making 
it dif =cult to de cide wha t to do when our childr en ask f or an allo wance—it is e xciting fr om a scien ti=c 
perspe ctive. If we do not kno w the answ er to an in teresting and empiric ally testable question, scienc e, and 
perhaps e ven you as a r esearcher , may be able to pr ovide the answ er. 
Notes 
1. Bushman, B. J . (200 2). Does v enting ang er feed or e xtinguish the >ame ? Catharsis, rumina tion, distr action, ang er, and 
aggr essiv e responding. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28 , 724–731. 
2. Kassin, S. M., & Gudjonsson, G . H. (2004 ). The psy cholog y of confession e videnc e: A r eview of the li terature and issues. 
Psychological Science in the Public I nterest, 5 , 33–6 7. 
3. Lilienf eld, S. O ., Lynn, S. J ., Ruscio, J ., & Be yerstein, B. L. (2010 ). 50 gr eat myths of popular psychology . Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackw ell. 
4. Gilovich, T . (1991). How we know what isn ’t so: The f allibility of human r eason in ever yday lif e. New York, NY : Free Press. 
5. Mann, T ., Tomiyama, A. J ., Westling, E., Le w, A., Samuels, B., & Cha tman, J . (200 7). M edicare’s search for ef fective 
obesi ty treatmen ts: Die ts ar e not the answ er. American Psychologist, 62 , 220– 233. 
14  |  Scienc e and Common Sense5.  Experimental and Clinic al Psychologists 
Learnin g Objectives 
1. De=ne the clinic al pr actice of psy cholog y and distinguish i t from e xperimen tal psy cholog y. 
2. Explain ho w scienc e is r elevant to clinic al pr actice. 
3. De=ne the c oncept o f an empiric ally suppor ted treatmen t and g ive some e xamples. 
Who Conducts Scientific R esearch in Psycholog y? 
Experimental Psychologists 
Scien ti=c r esearch in psy cholog y is g ener ally conduc ted by pe ople wi th doc toral degr ees (usuall y 
the doctor  of philosop hy [Ph.D.]) and master’ s degr ees in psy cholog y and r elated =elds, o ften suppor ted by 
research assistan ts wi th bachelor’ s degr ees or other r elevant training. Some o f them w ork for governmen t 
agencies ( e.g., doing r esearch on the impac t of public policies ), na tional associa tions ( e.g., the Americ an 
Psycholog ical Associa tion), non-pr o=t organiza tions ( e.g., N ational Allianc e on M ental Illness ), or in the 
private se ctor (e.g., in pr oduc t mar keting and de velopmen t; organiza tional beha vior). However, the majori ty 
of them ar e colleg e and univ ersity facult y, who o ften c ollabor ate wi th their gr adua te and under gradua te 
studen ts. Althoug h some r esearchers ar e tr ained and lic ense d as clinicians f or men tal he alth 
work—espe cially those who c onduc t research in clinic al psy cholog y—the majori ty are not. I nste ad, the y 
have exper tise in one or mor e of the man y other sub =elds o f psy cholog y: beha vioral neur oscienc e, cogni tive 
psycholog y, developmen tal psy cholog y, personali ty psy cholog y, social psy cholog y, and so on. Doc toral-le vel 
researchers mig ht be emplo yed to c onduc t research full-time or , like man y colleg e and univ ersity facult y 
members, to c onduc t research in addi tion to te aching classes and ser ving their insti tution and c ommuni ty 
in other w ays. 
Of c ourse, pe ople also c onduc t research in psy cholog y be cause the y en joy the in telle ctual and te chnic al 
challeng es in volved and the sa tisfac tion o f contributing to scien ti=c kno wledge of human beha vior. You 
might =nd tha t you en joy the pr ocess too. I f so, y our c olleg e or univ ersity mig ht offer oppor tunities to 
get involved in ong oing r esearch as ei ther a r esearch assistan t or a par ticipan t. Of c ourse, y ou mig ht =nd 
that you do not en joy the pr ocess o f conduc ting scien ti=c r esearch in psy cholog y. But at least y ou will 
have a be tter understanding o f wher e scien ti=c kno wledge in psy cholog y comes fr om, an appr eciation o f 
its str engths and limi tations, and an a wareness o f how it can be applie d to sol ve pr actical pr oblems in 
psycholog y and e veryday life. 
Experimen tal and Clinic al Psycholog ists  |  15 
Scienti8c Psych ology Blogs 
A fun and e asy w ay to f ollow curr ent scien ti=c r esearch in psy cholog y is to r ead an y of the man y excellen t 
blogs de voted to summarizing and c ommen ting on ne w =ndings. Among them ar e the f ollowing: 
Research Dig est, http://digest.bps.or g.uk/ 
Talk P sych, http://www.talkpsy ch.com/ 
Brain B logger, http://brainblogg er.com/ 
Mind H acks, http://mindhacks.c om/ 
PsyBlog, http://www.spring.or g.uk 
You c an also br owse to http://www.researchblogg ing.or g, sele ct psy cholog y as y our topic, and r ead en tries 
from a wide v ariety of blogs. 
Clinic al Psychologists 
Psycholog y is the scien ti=c stud y of beha vior and men tal pr ocesses. B ut it is also the applic ation o f scien ti=c 
research to “help pe ople, or ganiza tions, and c ommuni ties func tion be tter” ( Americ an P sycholog ical 
Associa tion, 2011)1. B y far the most c ommon and widel y kno wn applic ation is the 
clinical  practice  of psychology—the diagnosis and tr eatmen t of psy cholog ical disor ders and r elated 
problems. Le t us use the term  clinical pr actice  broadly to r efer to the ac tivities o f clinic al and c ounseling 
psycholog ists, school psy cholog ists, marriag e and famil y ther apists, lic ense d clinic al social w orkers, and 
others who w ork with pe ople individuall y or in small gr oups to iden tify and help addr ess their psy cholog ical 
problems. I t is impor tant to c onsider the r elationship be tween scien ti=c r esearch and clinic al pr actice 
because man y studen ts ar e espe cially interested in clinic al pr actice, per haps e ven as a c areer. 
The main poin t is tha t psy cholog ical disor ders and other beha vioral pr oblems ar e par t of the na tural 
world. This me ans tha t questions about their na ture, causes, and c onse quenc es ar e empiric ally testable and 
therefore subje ct to scien ti=c stud y. As wi th other questions about human beha vior, we cannot r ely on our 
intuition or c ommon sense f or de taile d and ac curate answ ers. Consider , for example, tha t doz ens o f popular 
books and thousands o f websites claim tha t adult childr en o f alcoholics ha ve a distinc t personali ty pro=le, 
including lo w self -este em, f eelings o f powerlessness, and dif =culties wi th in timac y. Althoug h this sounds 
plausible, scien ti=c r esearch has demonstr ated tha t adult childr en o f alcoholics ar e no mor e likely to ha ve 
these pr oblems than an ybod y else (Lilienf eld e t al., 2010 )2. Similar ly, questions about whe ther a par ticular 
psychother apy is ef fective are empiric ally testable questions tha t can be answ ered by scien ti=c r esearch. If a 
new psy chother apy is an ef fective treatmen t for depr ession, then systema tic obser vation should r eveal tha t 
depr esse d pe ople who r eceive this psy chother apy impr ove mor e than a similar gr oup o f depr esse d pe ople 
16  |  Experimen tal and Clinic al Psycholog istswho do not r eceive this psy chother apy (or who r eceive some alterna tive treatmen t). Treatmen ts tha t have 
been sho wn to w ork in this w ay are called empiricall y supported  treatmen ts. 
 
Empiric ally Supporte d Treatments 
An empiric ally suppor ted treatmen t is one tha t has be en studie d scien ti=cally and sho wn to r esult in gr eater 
impr ovemen t than no tr eatmen t, a plac ebo, or some alterna tive treatmen t. These include man y forms o f 
psychother apy, which c an be as ef fective as standar d drug ther apies. Among the f orms o f psy chother apy with 
strong empiric al suppor t are the f ollowing: 
• Acceptance and commi ttmen t ther apy (ACT). for depr ession, mix ed anxie ty disor ders, psy chosis, chr onic 
pain, and obsessiv e-compulsiv e disor der. 
• Beha vioral coup les ther apy. For alc ohol use disor ders. 
• Cogni tive beha vioral ther apy (CBT). For man y disor ders including e ating disor ders, depr ession, anxie ty 
disor ders, e tc. 
• Exposur e ther apy. For post-tr auma tic str ess disor der and phobias. 
• Exposur e ther apy with response pr evention.  For obsessiv e-compulsiv e disor der. 
• Famil y-based tr eatmen t. For eating disor ders. 
For a mor e comple te list, se e the f ollowing w ebsite, which is main taine d by Division 12 o f the Americ an 
Psycholog ical Associa tion, the Socie ty for Clinic al Psycholog y: http://www.div12.or g/psy cholog ical-tr eatmen ts 
 
Man y in the clinic al psy cholog y communi ty ha ve argued tha t their =eld has not paid enoug h attention to 
scien ti=c r esearch—for example, b y failing to use empiric ally suppor ted treatmen ts—and ha ve sugg ested 
a variety of chang es in the w ay clinicians ar e trained and tr eatmen ts ar e evaluated and put in to pr actice. 
Others belie ve tha t these claims ar e exagg erated and the sugg ested chang es ar e unne cessar y (Norcross, 
Beutler , & Le vant, 2005)3. On both sides o f the deba te, ho wever, ther e is agr eemen t tha t a scien ti=c 
appr oach to clinic al psy cholog y is essen tial if the g oal is to diagnose and tr eat psy cholog ical pr oblems base d 
on de taile d and ac curate kno wledge about those pr oblems and the most ef fective treatmen ts for them. So 
not onl y is i t impor tant for scien ti=c r esearch in clinic al psy cholog y to c ontinue, but i t is also impor tant for 
clinicians who ne ver conduc t a scien ti=c stud y themsel ves to be scien ti=cally literate so tha t the y can read 
and e valuate ne w research and mak e treatmen t decisions base d on the best a vailable e videnc e. 
Notes 
1. Americ an P sycholog ical Associa tion. (2011). About AP A. Retrieved from h ttp://www.apa.or g/about 
Experimen tal and Clinic al Psycholog ists  |  172. Lilienf eld, S. O ., Lynn, S. J ., Ruscio, J ., & Be yerstein, B. L. (2010 ). 50 gr eat myths of popular psychology . Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackw ell. 
3. Norcross, J . C., Beutler , L. E., & Le vant, R. F . (Eds.). (2005). Evidence-based pr actices in mental health: Debate and 
dialogue on the fundamental questions . Washington, DC: Americ an P sycholog ical Associa tion. 
18  |  Experimen tal and Clinic al Psycholog ists6.  Key Takeaways and Exer cises 
Key Takeaways 
• Knowledge is ac quired in man y ways including in tuition, a uthori ty, rationalism, empiricism,  and the 
scien ti=c me thod 
• Scienc e is a g ener al way of understanding the na tural world. Its thr ee fundamen tal features ar e 
systema tic empiricism, empiric al questions, and public kno wledge. 
• Psycholog y is a scienc e because i t tak es the scien ti=c appr oach to understanding human beha vior. 
• Pseudoscienc e refers to beliefs and ac tivities tha t are claime d to be scien ti=c but lack one or mor e of the 
three features of scienc e. It is impor tant to distinguish the scien ti=c appr oach to understanding human 
beha vior fr om the man y pseudoscien ti=c appr oaches. 
• Psycholog ists c onduc t research in or der to descri be basic phenomenon, to mak e predictions about 
futur e beha viors, and to e xplain the c auses o f beha vior. 
• Basic r esearch is c onduc ted to le arn about human beha vior f or its own sak e, and applie d research is 
conduc ted to sol ve some pr actical pr oblem. Both ar e valuable, and the distinc tion be tween the t wo is not 
always cle ar-cut. 
• People ’s intuitions about human beha vior, also kno wn as f olk psy cholog y, often turn out to be wr ong. This 
is one primar y reason tha t psy cholog y relies on scienc e rather than c ommon sense. 
• Researchers in psy cholog y cultiv ate certain cri tical-thinking a ttitudes. One is sk epticism. The y search for 
evidenc e and c onsider alterna tives bef ore accepting a claim about human beha vior as true. Another is 
toler ance for unc ertainty. The y withhold judgmen t about whe ther a claim is true or not when ther e is 
insuf =cien t evidenc e to de cide. 
• Scien ti=c r esearch in psy cholog y is c onduc ted mainl y by people wi th doc toral degr ees in psy cholog y and 
related =elds, most o f whom ar e colleg e and univ ersity facult y members. The y do so f or pr ofessional and 
for personal r easons, as w ell as to c ontribute to scien ti=c kno wledge about human beha vior. Most 
psycholog ists ar e experimen tal psy cholog ists and the y conduc t research. 
• The clinic al pr actice of psy cholog y—the diagnosis and tr eatmen t of psy cholog ical pr oblems—is one 
impor tant applic ation o f the scien ti=c discipline o f psy cholog y. 
• Scien ti=c r esearch is r elevant to clinic al pr actice because i t provides de taile d and ac curate kno wledge 
about psy cholog ical pr oblems and establishes whe ther tr eatmen ts ar e effective. 
Exercises 
• Practice: Consider thr ee things y ou kno w and de termine ho w you ac quired tha t kno wledge (authori ty, 
intuition, r ationalism, empiricism, the scien ti=c me thod). 
• Practice: Try to g ener ate dif ferent research questions to descri be, pr edict, and e xplain a phenomenon 
that interests y ou. 
Key Takeaways and Ex ercises   |  19• Practice: Base d on y our o wn e xperienc e or on things y ou ha ve alr eady learne d about psy cholog y, list 
three basic r esearch questions and thr ee applie d research questions o f interest to y ou. 
• Practice: List thr ee empiric al questions about human beha vior. List thr ee nonempiric al questions about 
human beha vior. 
• Practice: For each o f the f ollowing in tuitive beliefs about human beha vior, list thr ee reasons tha t it mig ht 
be true and thr ee reasons tha t it mig ht not be true: 
◦ You c annot trul y love another person unless y ou lo ve yourself. 
◦ People who r eceive “crisis c ounseling” imme diately after e xperiencing a tr auma tic e vent are better 
able to c ope wi th tha t trauma in the long term. 
◦ Studying is most ef fective when i t is al ways done in the same loc ation. 
• Watch the f ollowing vide o, in which psy cholog ist Sc ott Lilienf eld talks about c on=rma tion bias, tunnel 
vision, and using e videnc e to e valuate the w orld ar ound us: 
One or mor e inter active elements has been e xcluded fr om this ver sion of the te xt. You can view them 
online her e: https:/ /kpu.pressbooks. pub/psychmethods4e /?p=250#oembed- 2 
◦ Reading in prin t? Go to https:/ /youtu.be /gKV e0-p WjA0  or sc an this Q R code wi th your phone: 
• Discussion: Consider the f ollowing psy cholog ical claim. “P eople ’s choic e of spouse is str ongly in>uenc ed 
by their per ception o f their o wn par ents. Some choose a spouse who is similar in some w ay to one o f 
their par ents. Others choose a spouse who is dif ferent from one o f their par ents.” Is this claim falsi=able ? 
Why or wh y not? 
• Discussion: P eople some times sugg est tha t psy cholog y cannot be a scienc e because ei ther ( a) human 
beha vior c annot be pr edicted with perf ect accuracy or (b ) much o f its subje ct ma tter (e.g., thoug hts and 
feelings ) cannot be obser ved dir ectly. Do y ou agr ee or disagr ee with each o f these ide as? W hy? 
• Watch the f ollowing vide o by PHD Comics f or an o verview of open ac cess publishing and wh y it ma tters: 
One or mor e inter active elements has been e xcluded fr om this ver sion of the te xt. You can view 
them online her e: https:/ /kpu.pressbooks. pub/psychmethods4e /?p=250#oembed- 1 
◦ Reading in prin t? Go to https:/ /youtu.be /L5r VH1K GBCY  or sc an this Q R code wi th your phone: 
20  |  Key Takeaways and Ex ercises• Discussion: Some clinicians ar gue tha t wha t the y do is an “ art form” base d on in tuition and personal 
experienc e and ther efore cannot be e valuated scien ti=cally. Write a par agraph about ho w sa tis=e d you 
would be wi th such a clinician and wh y from e ach o f thr ee perspe ctives: 
◦ a poten tial clien t of the clinician 
◦ a judg e who must de cide whe ther to allo w the clinician to testif y as an e xper t witness in a child 
abuse c ase 
◦ an insur ance compan y represen tative who must de cide whe ther to r eimburse the clinician f or their 
services 
• Practice: Cr eate a shor t list o f questions tha t a clien t could ask a clinician to de termine whe ther the y pay 
suf=cien t attention to scien ti=c r esearch. 
Video Attributions 
• ESC 2017 – Sc ott Lilienf eld: “ Tunnel V ision: Con=rma tion B ias” © ESC E uropean Sk eptics Congr ess is 
license d under a  CC B Y (Attribution ) license 
• “Open Ac cess Explaine d!” by Piled Higher and De eper (P HD Comics ). CC B Y (Attribution ) 
Key Takeaways and Ex ercises   |  21